january 12 1888
was an unusually warm day in the u.s
plains states
sometime around noon the temperatures
got so high
that snow and ice started to melt people
were wandering outside
pleased and surprised by the unusual
phenomenon
but everything changed in a matter of
minutes
a dark heavy wall came from the
northwest
the hurricane force winds were bitterly
cold
the snow sharp and stinging it was like
fine flowers
smothering and making breathing
incredibly difficult
later some people describe being outside
like having their faces pushed into a
snow drift
within a few hours the temperature
dropped from 30 degrees
to minus 20 degrees in some places
the temperature fell to a bone chilling
minus 40 degrees fahrenheit
it was impossible to see anything
further than three steps away from the
door
what made the storm so lethal was its
suddenness
the short spell of exceptionally warm
weather before
and its timing during school and work
hours
people had left the safety of their
homes to go to town or to school
do chores or simply walk enjoying the
unusually pleasant weather
when the storm struck it was fast and
vicious
people had no time to prepare for it
they were climbing over snow drifts
toward their houses
and looking for front doors in the
blinding snow
farmers were tunneling into haystacks to
save their lives
some people were sure it was an
earthquake the winds were so
fierce they caused buildings to shake
and shutters to hit the walls and break
into pieces
the deafening noise even made adults
scream in fear
many people put lamps in their windows
to help those who were outside
but these beacons were hardly visible
the nightmare storm lasted for 12 to 18
hours
thousands of people couldn't find their
way in the terrible blizzard
this natural disaster got the name the
schoolhouse blizzard
or the children's blizzard because most
of these lost people were kids
they got stuck in their one-room
schoolhouses or tried to reach their
homes
only to lose their way in the raging
[Music]
snowstorm
[Applause]
[Music]
it was early morning when 19 year old
minnie freeman
made her way to a school in valley
county in nebraska
she was a teacher there while walking
the girl was marveling at the amazingly
warm winter day
soon after she arrived her 13 students
who were five to fifteen years old
shuffled into the building
the lesson began by midday
the sky cleared completely the
temperature rose
and the snow started to melt but when
many went outside with her charges
she noticed a blue stripe on the horizon
being extremely weather-wise she
immediately recognized a blue northern
a winter storm that struck with
hurricane force and usually without
warning
that's why the girl lost no time
bringing the children back
into the schoolhouse they had some coal
inside
but no food or clothes warm enough for a
long wait and freezing temperatures
then just as miss friedman had predicted
the terrible snowstorm arrived
hail started to pelt the windows when
the first powerful blast of wind struck
the small schoolhouse
the door didn't stand a chance it burst
inward
the roof was also partially lifted the
room immediately filled with snow
with the help of her older students
minnie managed to shut the door
brace it and nail it shut unfortunately
it wasn't a long-term solution many
realized they didn't have much time
it wouldn't be long until the building
collapsed under the sheer force of the
elements
she was proven right when the door was
torn open again
and a roof section was carried away if
they stayed inside
waiting for the snow storm to finish
they would freeze in no time
miss freeman was frantically looking for
a solution while trying to calm the
terrified kids
she searched the classroom for anything
that could help them
and found a clothesline an idea came to
her mind
she looped the rope around each of her
students and then tied the end around
her own body
then she scooped the youngest child in
her arms and led the kids into the
raging
storm the wind blew the snow with such
force
that snowflakes stung their faces like
tiny arrows
everything they could see in front of
them was a blinding sheet of snow
luckily many had a perfect sense of
direction
she was also determined to save the
children and herself
the small group set off to the nearest
farmhouse that was around one mile away
miss freeman boarded there and knew the
way after what seemed like
hours they got there safely all the
children survived and were relatively
well
interestingly eyewitnesses mentioned
later that miss freeman
didn't use any rope to keep the children
from straying away
she was present everywhere at the front
of the little procession
at the back and on the sides but she
wouldn't have been able to bring the
kids to safety
but for the help of the older boys and
girls
in any case miss freeman captured the
whole country's attention
she got the nickname nebraska's fearless
made
hundreds of marriage proposals and tons
of gifts and letters of admiration from
all over the country
naturally shy minnie was taken aback by
all the praise and publicity
she wanted no fame for doing what she
considered her job
it was her responsibility to save her
students and she did everything possible
to fulfill it
although the disaster was dreadful and
unexpected
other teachers managed to save their
school children from a horrible fate
for example school teacher seymour dopp
from pawnee city nebraska
insisted on his 17 students staying at
school
when the storm broke out at about 2pm
all of them spent the night in the
building
the teacher and the kids had to burn
stockpiled wood
otherwise they'd have frozen by the
morning the next day
anxious parents who hadn't slept a
second the previous night
made their way toward the school
building climbing over massive
five-foot high snow drifts these people
could only hope
they would arrive in time to save their
children
luckily everyone trapped under the snow
made it through the night
in great plains south dakota two men
saved several schoolchildren
they tied a rope to the closest house
and then headed for the school building
they secured the other end of the rope
and used it to bring the kids to safety
those people who were outside when the
storm arrived tried to move along a
fence
railroad track or a row of trees they
could find a building only by accident
after bumping into it if it was
impossible to reach home
people hid in barns chicken coops
haystacks
or even snow drifts one eleven-year-old
girl was caught in the storm together
with several cows
she found her way home by grabbing the
lead cow's tail
the animal knew its way and brought the
girl and the herd
back to safety the storm left behind
white lifeless planes
with no trees and monstrous 5-10 foot
high snow drifts
one of these behemoths measured 30 feet
deep and one mile long
the piles of snow were frozen and both
people and horses
could easily walk on top of them all
this stayed on the ground during the
spring and even early summer
it was a lasting reminder of the
destructive power of nature